CSIRO Division of Information Technology Data Mining Portfolio ­ TR DM 96019

PEPNet Poster

PEPNet: Parallel Evolutionary Artificial Neural Networks

File: ACNN96.TEX Printed: 8th May 1996

Gerrit Riessen Department of Computer Science
Australian National University Canberra ACT 0200 Australia

Xin Yao Department of Computer Science Australian Defence Forces Academy
Canberra ACT 2600 Australia

Zhexue Huang, Peter Milne, Graham Williams CSIRO Division of Information Technology GPO Box 664 Canberra ACT 2601 Australia Graham.Williams@cbr.dit.csiro.au

10 April 1996
Abstract
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) provide an important classification tool for Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD). Feed-forward fully-connected neural networks using a back propagation algorithm for weight adjustment are a common approach to building ANNs. Unfortunately such ANNs require considerable time to train, particularly when large datasets are involved. Training time is also adversely affected when the characteristics of the dataset are not consistent with the structure of the ANN. In developing ANNs there are no hard and fast rules for determining the structure of the network.
Evolutionary Artificial Neural Networks (EANNs) take advantage of evolutionary search techniques to address some of the problems associated with developing optimal ANNs. EANNs dynamically modify the structure of the ANNs on the basis of performance. EPNet (Yao and Liu 1996) is a serial algorithm which adopts these ideas to produce efficient ANNs. Such techniques produce greater accuracy in the networks, however at the expense of extra computational and storage requirements.
Our work focuses on PEANNs, Parallel Evolutionary Artificial Neural Networks. PEANNs have the potential to produce accurate networks in significantly less time than serial EANNs using larger datasets. A parallel implementation of EPNet, called PEPNet, is being developed to explore this hypothesis. The research is being performed within the Data Mining In The Large (DMITL) project of the Advanced Computational Systems (ACSys) CRC, a joint venture between the Australian National University (ANU), the CSIRO Division of Information Technology (DIT), Digital Equipment Corporation, Fujitsu Australia Limited and Sun Microsystems Australia.

Revision 1.3

Copyright c 1996 by CSIRO

Page 1 of 1

